[Music]
so as she doesn't mentioned I'm a
curator here in San Francisco and much
of my focus has been on art and
technology and looking at media and
various ways
but I was actually going to use this
occasion
to basically asked a question and that
question is how can we foster a more
critical digital culture in the Bay Area
and obviously the great gray areas been
doing a lot on that forefront so it just
seems like the great opportunity to
bring that question to the floor today
um
yeah so I'm just going to jump into my
talk this whoops let me put this down a
little bit whew there we go little short
this is a banner year for the arts
community in the bay area right here and
right here
the gray area foundation for the art is
even more settled into it's newish grand
theater which the organization moved
into in 2014 and
the gallery and studio space Minnesota
Street projects launched we also saw BAM
PFA open their new building and soon
actually beginning next week the sfmoma
will open once again and with all this
activity we're also seeing in the visual
arts sector a number of major art fairs
and galleries arriving to the city so
untitled art fair which is a major
commercial art farrah in Miami will be
coming to San Francisco next January we
also the gagosian is opening a major
commercial galleries opening up in
downtown San Francisco and then most
recently antonkarin and in do crepes
have announced that they're going to be
opening us up a temporary gallery space
in Minnesota Street project so this the
news and these this is great news for
the Bay Area it brings genuine
excitement and optimism
and and I think in a lot of the
conversations I've been having with
other arts professionals in the city of
feeling that San Francisco in some ways
has finally arrived
which is also tampered by grumblings to
some more vocal than others but you know
I think there's both of these things are
kind of happening right now
and I actually moved here to San
Francisco from New York in 2012 I moved
back I actually grew up in the Bay Area
and came back here and in 2012 I
remember the the mood was much more
depressed
it seemed like there are number of
spaces that were facing you know
financial difficulty like the lab down
the street intersection for the Arts was
having a serious economic issue and it
felt like every other artist I knew was
either going through a horrible eviction
process or leaving the city entirely
because they have been proud to priced
out and I unfortunately I don't think
that's that scenario is entirely changed
even with these new developments
but you know in 2012 it really felt like
kind of a downer a downer a year for the
Bay Area and then the other thing too I
noticed when I move back is that there
seemed like a lot of tension and and in
some ways that this is still true
between the arts community and the tech
sector here in San Francisco and and it
would bumble up and in various ways
so
yeah so I thought I'd take this you know
given just to give you a context of sort
of where things are right now I thought
I'd take the speaking opportunity and
the attention of this audience so step
back and reflect on this moment the
current moment in San Francisco while
asking this very simple question which
is also I think a question a lot of
people will be asking over the weekend
to in various ways
and the question is how can we foster a
critical digital culture in the Bay Area
and I feel even though they're all these
really great developments happening we
can still push that side of the cultural
spectrum further and this seems like a
fantastic place and time to ask this
question especially in the space with
this group and during this festival so
many years ago a curator any Pritikin
who is currently the chief curator the
contemporary jewish museum in downtown
San Francisco wrote a prescription for a
healthy art seemed which in many ways
was aimed specifically at the Bay Area I
come across this document often as a
curator I see it pinned on artists
studio cork boards I see people posting
it on tumblr
post it on Facebook it's sort of a local
mantra if you will or mantra
reading it again his adjust ins to me
stand that in order to sustain healthy
art scene and I know this is extremely
tiny text so I'll just give you the
shorthand Pritikin sees a need for a
large pool of artists okay check
affordable studio space active art
schools adventurous collectors and our
dealers sophistic art critics numerous
publications that are both art specific
and otherwise artist funding and locally
engaged museums and curators and as I
mentioned before you know right now it
seems like the Bay Area is kind of
taking everything down the list which is
great this is good news for us however
and this is an ongoing question giving
the bay area's unique placement as the
center for the tech industry and
moreover as a generator of technological
design and given the fact that this
particular sector has an enormous
cultural hold
could or should we do more to bring
these two disciplines together and what
form should that take so you know in
this brief talk I would like to present
to art works as examples that have
sparked my thinking on this matter and
while they don't precisely present a
clean answer to this question as if easy
answers ever exist I believe they serve
as a way of bridging art and technology
that pushes both fields further in
essence I'd like to see artworks that
engage with the thorny condition of the
present by being objects that act and do
rather than solely represent and just as
a quick sidebar
art historian David jostle it's been
sort of talking about this concept as
well and he was definitely a major
inspiration for some of these ideas
sort of thinking about the shift from
our works that represent two artworks
that are sort of active in the world and
he's written a lot about how in our sort
of contemporary media environment image
circulate and so he wrote this book
called after art that is a really
fantastic text that ain't you should
look out and in the past year he sort of
extended these questions about the power
and currency the images have to thinking
about the power that our objects have to
act in the world so that's just a quick
sidebar in the sidebar so when you layer
in technology this question about how
what art objects do takes on additional
weight in some i'm seeking active art
objects immersed in our present
political and social condition which
perhaps can push our technology to be
more responsible and i believe there's
an opportunity to see that more in San
Francisco so the first work I'm going to
be pointing to is a piece
entitled autonomy cube by trevor Paglen
created in collaboration with jacob
appelbaum in 2014 and some of you might
have seen this that
Altman Segal gallery had this up about I
think maybe earlier this year maybe
early last year so perhaps you've
encountered it before so designed for
installation in art museums galleries
and other civic spaces the autonomy cube
creates an open Wi-Fi hotspot over the
Tor network and acts itself as a tour
relay Paglen describes the work as a
quote way of enhancing museums as we
know institutions are blindly accepting
surveillance systems as a way to track
audiences for example the Dallas Museum
of Art had this friends membership
program that rewarded visitors with free
parking museum store discounts etc for
tracking the participation at the museum
through their custom mobile and web
platform and this program was you know
praised in the museum community for
using technology to gather data about
visitor behavior and demographics which
is something any institution really
needs for various reasons but at the
same time its creepily employing that
technology the way that big biz this
like you know target or Facebook would
use it without really being critical of
the kind of surveillance it's putting it
to play for its audience so Palin states
that the autonomy coup cube puts forth
in opposition to this trend it inserts a
conversation regarding surveillance in
the age of these invasive systems and it
establishes an alternative through the
privacy oriented volunteer and
infrastructure of tour
the artist thinks in civic institutions
like museums need to do more and be on
the front front of critical
conversations regarding big data and
surveillance not just blindly adopting
these tools and and I would I would
agree with that as well
the second work I'd like to point to is
a project I actually helps present at
yerba buena center for the arts in that
same room that Josette was describing
earlier and
the project is called the sprawl and
it's by a group called meta Haven and
actually this work was greatly inspired
by a lot of Benjamin Bratton's writings
to who will be speaking in just a little
bit so I also wanted to kind of bring
that into my talk to for that reason so
i'm going to show the trailer for this
piece really quickly and then talk talk
a little bit about it but i want to show
you the trailer for so you have a little
sense of what it is
[Music]
mobile deal is significant information
on to my
business to suppress assignee Magli
estan en esta en formato
mantovani melissa boy / 08
[Music]
spirit sourav nostos material
wicked Amyas cars de Nova a venir circle
may attract a new production
period or materialistic formulas motion
that we consider Buddhist Matt intimacy
back
gluttonous obstinate sporadic go with a
keen ears open your card with cancer
council
[Music]
you
what about destroying khalil anything we
have never even truth we can't believe
in anything
es una cagna asino vomited meta
really ce pas de la mia circle Oh Elmer
Couture III about Nina katrina Bowden
install
Easterner mr. DuPont is reason
istana missed the whole mess rewind
eastern US was Naruto slobodan he cheats
[Music]
so this is the installation footage or
installation shot of that same piece
the sprawl bills on the amsterdam-based
studio meta havens ongoing research
addressing the negotiation and pitfalls
a modern democracy given the rise of
mass surveillance big data and
cloud-based computing the sprawl
explores mutation of propaganda in the
age of social media with a particular
focus on how the diffuse network
circulation of messages through these
channels affects how we read interpret
and understand events presented both
online as a series of short films
distributed across various platforms so
you saw that link at the end of sprawl
dot space and in the galleries a
multi-channel video installation which
you see an image of here and there also
showing us at various film festivals all
over all over the world the sprawl
exists in a dispersed format in order to
occupy the same space as its subjects in
essence becoming as meta Haven described
it propaganda about propaganda
inhabiting multiple space online and
offline in the cinema the gallery the
mobile phone the work enters the flow as
theorists Boris kroy's might put it
like the studio's other work and they've
done a lot of projects in the realm of
graphic design installation
they have a very diverse practice
the this brawl adopts it like the other
the studio's other work it adapts
seraphic design identity branding and
product development and now moving image
as a means to negotiate the imagery and
aesthetics surrounding commercial and
political power structures and that's
pretty key what I find fascinating and
exciting about meta havens practice is
that it occupies this negotiation and
here the key term is occupy
so these are two examples and this is a
brief talk and there are so many other
examples I could point to but I am
spotlighting them here in order to
describe what what I'd like to see more
of coming out of San Francisco
so what's next if we can agree and I
think we can agree that there's a
renewed vibrancy within the Bay Area's
arts community with all of these
different spaces and you know all of
these different things happening that
it's healthy or at least healthier could
this vibrancy in any way be directed
towards an enriched and generative
critical digital culture in the Bay Area
one that crosses sectors built bridges
and imagines alternatives to a solely
profit-driven neoliberal and capitalist
technological production in turn could
that help yield more ethical socially
responsible technology maybe a better
world it's a possibility worth
entertaining and I wanted to sort of put
that question out here today so thank
you and that's my talk thank you
you